[SDK] - Proposal for samples generation via GO and in the SDK repo (#47)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/samples-generation.md

---
title: Samples Generation
authors:
  - "@camilamacedo86"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2020-09-02
last-updated: 2020-09-04
status: implemented
---

# Samples Generation

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [x] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions [optional]

1. Should not the project has a Memcached GO Sample with webhooks and other without using webhooks since it shows an advanced feature and it used is not mandatory? Note the Go tutorial do not use webhooks.  

## Summary

> This proposal is over the samples getting started to be generated on the SDK repo via go to bring more flexibilities and facilities to keep them maintained and improve their implementation and customizations. 

Author: Accepted all with a few changes. See that the idea is not to use scripts but instead use code implementation done with Go.

> By using Golang, we can easily inject code implementation as have helpers which brings a lot of facilities to customize them. Also, it allows a more readable implementation.  

Author: Hi @estroz, 

See that has a PR with the implementation proposed here done already to cover all details. However, I will try to be more specific here.

## Motivation

- Improve the maintainability, readability and reusability
- None effort to keep the samples updated with the latest releases
- Less effort and more flexibility to customize the samples  

### Goals

- Centralize the samples in the [operator-sdk-samples](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples) repository generated on SDK repo
- For each PR a validation should be made to ensure that all samples are update

> - Provide the SampleContext as part of the generation of the sample on SDK repo at the same way that provides the [TestContext](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/test/e2e/utils/test_context.go#L36) 

Author: It is true 💯

### Non-Goals

- Implement tests to ensure that the samples are working as expected
- Link the samples in the docs or aligned then with the tutorials

## Proposal

### I am as maintainer/contributor would like to:

- be able to troubleshoot the code used to create the samples and easy improve them as solve issues that might be faced
- no longer spend effort to update the samples on the release process
- easily able to create samples based on the tutorial steps
- ensure that the changes performed against the master will not introduce bugs in the steps required to build the samples and following up the tutorials
- able to implement the code to generate the samples using the same approach used in the e2e tests (it is very helpful to keep the project maintained)
- able to easily review pr's which has changes for the scaffolds (without the need to clone them locally)
      
### I am as operator developer would like to:
- check the examples of projects and features provided to help me build my operators as know how they work

> - check the project which is the result of the tests performed in the tutorials provided

Reviewer: These are user stories, please organize them as such with the correct heading.

Author: Hi @estroz, 

I did not get your comment. A user story technically is : 

> As a < type of user >, I want < some goal > so that < some reason >. 

So, it is organized. However, instead of duplicated many times `As a < type of user >, I want ` it is the title.

Reviewer: Check out the [this example EP](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/template.md#user-stories-optional) for correct formatting.

Author: Hi @estroz, 

Sorry, but about this one, I feel that I cannot agree with. I will try to share my reasons and motivations. 

`User Story` is well defined in computer science and I do not agree that we should not follow its definition and common usage. Actually, I already shared in other moments and comments that IMO we need to write more "user stories" (e.g epic/rfe) and as it principle describes. 

Particularly, I really think that they are very helpful for I understand what is required to do and achieve. I mean `<who>` would able to do `<what>` with the implementation. And then, when I do not see it done as anywhere and in a very verbose way, for me, makes the process to understand the need harder than easier which also makes I believe that would be a problem for others as well. Note that if you looking for `user stories in computer science` you will find that it mainly as follows in everywhere. 

> As a `< type of user >, I want < some goal > so that < some reason >` 

See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_story. 

Regards `Check out the this example EP for correct formatting.`

See that the template describe:

> Detail the things that people will be able to do if this is implemented. Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting bogged down.

Which is exactly what was done here.

Author: However, I agree that has to improvements. I will be working on that 👍

Author: I am closing this one. It was improved. Thank you for your input.

### Risks and Mitigations

> N/A

Reviewer: There are no risks to generating complex example operators? What about copying parts of the reconcile loop into the generated operator and the copied code isn't updated?

Author: The build of the samples is tested by the CI. However, is a NO GO run tests over the samples to ensure that they are runnable. Regards the inject code is wrong then, it is the risk of any code/change implementation against the project but OK, we can add that.

---
title: Automatic Samples Generation using Go language
authors:
  - "@camilamacedo86"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2020-09-02
last-updated: 2020-09-20
status: implementable
---

# Automatic Samples Generation using Go language

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [x] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions

> 1. Should not the project has a Memcached GO Sample with webhooks and other without using webhooks since it shows an advanced feature and it used is not mandatory? Note the Go tutorial do not use webhooks.  

Author: Yes, we would have 2 samples. However, in upstream/kb we have none similar testdata. The idea is we have samples with the steps/implementation suggested to users in the tutorials. The Go Memcached tutorial has none webhooks and we ought to have an advanced tutorial with the additional steps to use webhooks. So, in the end, it would be:

// The Memcached sample without webhooks 
// The Memcached sample with webhooks

Note that we can re-use the first sample steps as we will do in the e2e test to build the second one. 
Also, both should be integrated with OLM since it is a key feature of the tool.

Answer: It should, since the memcached project is a sample for users to reference and webhooks are commonly used.

## Summary

> The [operator-sdk-samples](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples) repo contains an example Go operator project for users to reference when building their own projects. These example becomes outdated quickly because it requires its own release process and manual updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [operator-sdk-samples](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples) repo contains an example Go operator project for users to reference when building their own projects. These examples become outdated quickly because it requires its own release process and manual updates.
```

Instead, this example project should be made generate-able via a code and (re)generated in a directory of the operator-sdk repo. Each PR to the operator-sdk repo that changes the scaffolds will require these samples be (re)generated via a makefile target and the CI should ensure that the samples are not outdated.

Maintainers will be able to develop the code to generate the samples via the Golang language and using the same approach adopted on the tests. The helpers and utilities to mock the data will be available to be used for both.

The e2e test also will be able to invoke the samples code implementation which will ensure that they are runnable and will keep centralized this implementation as well to achieve a better maintainability.

In this way, it is no longer required keep the repository [operator-sdk-samples](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples) and it should be deprecated. 

> **NOTE** The test utils as what is proposed here can fit well in upstream. It is not a Goal push these implementations to upstream, however, it definitely could be an ultimate end goal to keep in mind. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE** The test utils as what is proposed here can fit well in upstream Kubebuilder. It is not a Goal push these implementations to Kubebuilder, however, it definitely could be an ultimate end goal to keep in mind. 
```

## Motivation

### Goals

- Generate samples via Go to improve the maintainability, readability and reusability
- Checking if samples are outdated via CI to reduce its risk of the sample projects gets outdated
- Building samples on SDK to facilitate the development process to mock data and keep the samples maintained by using the same approach and design defined and used via the test
- Re-using samples on tests to improve the maintainability and ensure that they are runnable.
- Helpers and utilities available for tests and samples
- Specific implementation following the same approach to define the sample and the tests context

### Non-Goals

- Link the samples in the docs or aligned then with the tutorials
- Provide advanced helpers or Boilerplates to mock the data that could be used in the tests and/or in the samples generation

> - Push this implementation to upstream

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Push this implementation to upstream Kubebuilder
```

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Generate samples via Go 

> - I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be able to troubleshoot the code used to create the samples, so that I can easily fix the issues. 

Reviewer 3: If we are going to scaffold the operator from scratch and test all the functionalities, then would we be removing the existing e2e tests for go/ansible/helm? We would be doing the same steps twice.

Reviewer 2: Using the samples for the e2e tests is an idea on the table, but when we talked about this initially we thought that the e2e tests should be out of scope for this proposal to keep it from becoming a huge task.

- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be develop the samples as I develop the tests, so that I do not need to be familiar with a different approach
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be easily create samples based on the tutorial steps, so that we can provide the expected result of the website tutorials

#### Checking if samples are outdated via CI

- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be able to check the samples update with the changes made, so that I do not need to spend effort on the samples after the release process

> - I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to able to check the samples updated in the diff of te github on the review process, so that I do not need to clone them locally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to able to check the samples updated in the diff of the github on the review process, so that I do not need to clone them locally
```

#### Building samples on SDK

> - I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be easily ensure that the changes made will not brake the steps required to build the projects, so that we can reduce the chance to introduce critical bugs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to easily ensure that the changes made will not break the steps required to build the projects, so that we can reduce the chance to introduce critical bugs. 
```

> - I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to check the result of the changes made in the scaffold by verifying the samples changes , so that I do not need to pull the pull request locally and run the steps to review the code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to check the result of the changes made in the scaffolding by verifying the samples changes , so that I do not need to pull the pull request locally and run the steps to review the code. 
```

- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to have the samples update with the code changes, so that I do not update the samples project after the release
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to have the samples update with the code changes, so that I do not update the samples project after the release
- I am an operator developer, I want check the examples of projects and features provided, so that I can easily know how to build my operator projects

> - I am an operator developer, I want to check the final result of the tutorial steps, so that I can easily check if what I miss when the things do not go well as expected

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- I am an operator developer, I want to check the final result of the tutorial steps, so that I can easily compare if when the process does not go as expected
```

#### Helpers and utilities available for tests and samples

- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to be able to use the helpers in both places, so that I can centralize the code and spend less effort to apply the changes when required 

#### Specific implementation following the same approach 

- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to feel familiarized with the code implementation, so that I can easily contribute to both places
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want the samples and tests implementations are compatible, so that I can easily re-use them and create helpers which are valid for both scenarios
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to have the flexibility to create samples decoupled from the tests, so that I can easily mock scenarios that will not be used in the e2e tests
- I am a maintainer/contributor, I want to have the flexibility to create samples decoupled from the tests, so that I can easily mock scenarios that will not be used in the e2e tests if required since its reusability concept will be not hurt.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints 

> - The samples should be build inside of `./testdata/<type>/` path

Reviewer 3: Just a quick doubt. Im not sure how KB does this. But, if we have different plugins for same type of operator, would we scaffold the project with default plugin version which is set.

Author: At the moment we have only one version of the plugin. To create the samples we use the SDK binary and run the commands at the same way that users will do that. So, in the future, if we wish we can create samples for diff plugins versions since it means `operator-sdk --plugins="plugin version"`

Reviewer 4: @varshaprasad96 @camilamacedo86 I would NOT scaffold out samples with multiple plugins. I would create the samples for our default use case only. And possibly for any complex use cases like we are talking about with webhooks. Honestly I can see 2 samples: 1) default easy peasy project. 2) one with all the options enabled to show the complex features.

Author: @jmrodri it is not in the scope of the EP anyway. However, the stack allows us to do that if we wish in the future. I mean, has no limitation for that if we wish to do that. But I agree 100% with you.
